Perf guidelines (#303)
MicrosoftDocs/OData-docs: Odata-docs/performance/mark-edm-model-immutable.md

OData libraries at times perform multiple lookups in the EDM model when processing a request. Some of these lookups may be expensive, especially for large models with a lot of schema elements.
We have some optimizations in place to reduce the performance overhead of these internal lookups, but some of these optimizations are only applicable if the library knows that the EDM model will not change. You can enable these optimization by explicitly marking your EDM as immutable by calling the `MarkAsImmutable` method, which is an extension method in the `Microsoft.OData.Edm` namespace.

```csharp
using Microsoft.OData.Edm;

IEdmModel GetEdmModel()
{
    var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
    modelBuilder.EntitySet<Person>("People");
    IEdmModel model = modelBuilder.GetEdmModel();
    model.MarkAsImmutable();
    return model;
}
```

It is recommended to mark the EDM model as immutable since most applications do not modify the model after it has been constructed.

> It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not be modified after this `MarkAsImmutable` is called. If the model is modified after calling `MarkAsImmutable` you may experience unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after the `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. If the model is modified after calling `MarkAsImmutable`, you may experience unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:
```

> It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after the `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. Modifying the model after `MarkAsImmutable` method has been called may lead to unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model doesn't actually change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after the `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. Modifying the model after `MarkAsImmutable` method has been called may lead to unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:
```
Or remove "actually" altogether...

> It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after the `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. Modifying the model after `MarkAsImmutable` method has been called may lead to unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: Maybe move "The following code snippet shows an example..." to own paragraph

> It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after the `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. Modifying the model after `MarkAsImmutable` method has been called may lead to unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: Would it be better to say "It is the responsibility of the developer..." rather than "It is the responsibility of the caller..."?

---
title:  "Mark the EDM model as immutable"
description: A guide on how to improve performance by marking the EDM model as immutable.
date:   2023-08-11
ms.date: 8/11/2023
author: habbes
ms.author: clhabins
---

# Mark the EDM model as immutable

**Applies To**:[!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../includes/appliesto-webapi-v8.md)][!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../includes/appliesto-webapi-v7.md)][!INCLUDE[appliesto-odatalib](../includes/appliesto-odatalib-v7.md)]

OData libraries at times perform multiple lookups in the EDM model when processing a request. Some of these lookups may be expensive, especially for large models with a lot of schema elements.

> We have some optimizations in place to reduce the performance overhead of these internal lookups, but some of these optimizations are only applicable if the library knows that the EDM model will not change. You can enable these optimization by explicitly marking your EDM as immutable by calling the `MarkAsImmutable` method, which is an extension method in the `Microsoft.OData.Edm` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have some optimizations in place to reduce the performance overhead of these internal lookups, but some of these optimizations are only applicable if the library knows that the EDM model will not change. You can enable these optimizations by explicitly marking your EDM as immutable by calling the `MarkAsImmutable` method, which is an extension method in the `Microsoft.OData.Edm` namespace.
```

---

> title:  "Mark the IEdmModel as immutable"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title:  "Mark the Edm model as immutable"
```

> description: A guide on how to improve performance by marking the IEdmModel as immutable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: A guide on how to improve performance by marking the Edm model as immutable.
```

date:   2023-08-11

> ms.date: 9/5/2022

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ms.date: 8/11/2023
```
m/d/yyyy?

author: habbes
ms.author: clhabins
---

> # Mark the `IEdmModel` as immutable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Mark the Edm model as immutable
```

**Applies To**:[!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../includes/appliesto-webapi-v8.md)][!INCLUDE[appliesto-webapi](../includes/appliesto-webapi-v7.md)][!INCLUDE[appliesto-odatalib](../includes/appliesto-odatalib-v7.md)]

> OData libraries may perform multiple lookups in the `IEdmModel` when processing a request. Some of these lookups may be expensive, especially for large models with a lot of schema elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OData libraries at times perform multiple lookups in the Edm model when processing a request. Some of these lookups may be expensive, especially for large models with a lot of schema elements.
```

> We have some optimizations in place to reduce the performance overhead of these internal lookups, but some of these optimizations are only applicable if the library knows that the EDM model

Reviewer: EDM or Edm? Pick one and stick with it...

Author: I've decided on `EDM` since one is more likely to read it as an abbreviation that way.

> will not change. You can enable these optimization by explicitly marking your EDM as immutable by calling the `MarkAsImmutable` method, which is an extension method in the `Microsoft.OData.Edm` namespace.

Reviewer: There shouldn't be a line break before this line. It should be a continuation, i.e. "if the library knows that the Edm model will not change ..."

```csharp
using Microsoft.OData.Edm;

IEdmModel GetEdmModel()
{
    var modelBuilder = new ODataConventionModelBuilder();
    modelBuilder.EntitySet<Person>("People");
    IEdmModel model = modelBuilder.GetEdmModel();
    model.MarkAsImmutable();
    return model;
}
```

> It is recommended to mark the `IEdmModel` as immutable since most applications do not modify the model after it has been constructed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to mark the Edm model as immutable since most applications do not modify the model after it has been constructed.
```

It is however important to note that the library makes no effort to ensure or verify

> that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model will not be modified after this method is called. If you modify

Reviewer: Why do you have a line break before the "that the model"?

Author: I think it was just for word wrapping. Nothing that impacts the rendered output. But I've removed it.

> that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model will not be modified after this method is called. If you modify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the model actually doesn't change after calling this method. It is the responsibility of the caller to ensure that the model is not modified after `MarkAsImmutable` method is called. If you modify
```

> the model after calling `MarkAsImmutable()` you may experience unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: Why do you have a line break before "the model after"? Please check for such misplaced line breaks across the doc

> the model after calling `MarkAsImmutable()` you may experience unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the model is modified after calling `MarkAsImmutable()` you may experience unexpected behavior. The following code snippet shows an example of incorrect usage of this method:
```

```csharp
using Microsoft.OData.Edm;

IEdmModel GetEdmModel()
{
    var model = new EdmModel();
    var personType = new EdmEntityType("Sample.NS", "Person");
    personType.AddKeys(personType.AddStructuralProperty("Id", EdmPrimitiveTypeKind.Int32, isNullable: false));
    model.MarkAsImmutable();

    var addressType = new EdmComplexType("Sample.NS", "Address");
    // DO NOT DO THIS! Modifying the model after calling MarkAsImmutable

>     // can lead to undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // can lead to unexpected behavior.
```
